---
layout: post
title: One Year
categories: short-story
abstract: Staring at a tree for one year.
author: Henry Blanchette
table_of_contents: false
---

The tree's shade finally inches over me. I chose this spot mostly because of the
tree, and its place standing tall at the top of the hill. I can see miles in
every direction --- ahead of me, that is. I should not moved my head to
disorient my set perspective. My decision is to sit here in this position,
without moving, for one year. And so far, it has scarcely been a day. I
hesitantly remind myself.

My eyes are not to move either, so my gaze rests on another particular tree some
distance down the hill. I become intimately familiar with this tree. Since the
tree is so far, my focus encompasses the entire tree and not just a small part.
I notice the style of its branches, the contrast of its trunk's color to my
scene's background, the reflective texture of its leaves. But it is all in
little detail; I find myself imagining hypotheses for what the details might be.
"Is there a crevice, there, in the trunk?" Or "Was it that leaf that just fell,
or a leaf right behind it?" Now the distance frustrates my inquiry.

About an hour into this exercise, I begin to notice a novel phenomenon in my
vision. The details of the tree, they seem... more clear to me now. The
low-resolution pixels of my vision seem to have slowly refined, revealing a
quality of definition in visual experience that I've never imagined. It is as if
every minute nook in the tree's body was right in front of my eyes, and
simultaneously. I peer inside the nooks, noting their inner texture of darker,
wetter bark. My eyes begin to water at the density of visual information. But
soon the weak film over my eyes is eroded away by the gentle-yet-persistent
breeze. I presumed the film was functionally important, but given these last few
hours to make myself comfortable with a new kind of sight, its removal has the
effect of the removal of the cap off a lens.

The sun tumbles over the horizon, darkness overcoming. At first I fear that the
lack of light will make my sleepless nights uninteresting, but after a quick
adjustment after three hours of darkness, my sight is up to the daytime quality
I'd become used to. In fact, by the time the sun begins to rise in the east, I
can tell little difference between the old dark and the new light. Except that
the new light is painful for an hour.

I notice another novel phenomenon about eight hours later, the early afternoon
of my second day. Though my eyes have maintained their fixture upon my tree
friend at the bottom of the hill, it is no longer the bounds of my visual focus;
slowly becoming. I first notice the tiniest bit a variance --- that I am able to
analyze the colors, texture and shape of neighboring trees just outside my
immediate focal point. At such a distance, this requires immense attention, and
tires me quickly. And then I relax for a moment, and feel my attention expand to
immediately and effortlessly encompass those neighboring trees. Was this
breakthrough at the success of my trained attention, or at the failure of it?

With my visual focus expanded ever just so much, my whole visual perspective
shifts frames. Previously, I had been meditatively focussing on a tree in the
distance along with bits and parts of its peers. Now, I am squinting from the
inside of an blurred glass sphere with a minuscule clear spot in front of me
kept just large enough to allow a distant tree and haphazard parts of its peers.
This shift-of-perspective is sudden, and my next attentive action is just as
sudden. I wipe away the dirty blur by expanding my attention in the same way I
might have otherwise moved my eyes. The degrees of freedom are exhilarating. I
notice for the first time the grass on the earth around me, the surface of the
tree next to me, the cardinality of the clouds above, the smoothness of the lake
off to my left. Areas of my attention escape the realm of vision, and
incorporate other senses as well. The same microscopic detail I extracted of my
originally-focussed tree I see, feel, hear, smell, and taste all around me.

I must have failed to notice nightfall again, because now the sun rises in a
mark of the end of my first week. After just the first few days, it became easy
to designate a line of leaves on the tips of trees along a mountain in the
eastern distance to serve as measures of the sun's progression longitudinally
across the horizon each morning. After another week, the designation of these
particular leaves has become so natural to me that it appears that the very
essence of their shape and placement could stand for nothing else. Each leaf, in
the context of the others, resembles a particular date like a pictogram.

How do I pass the time? When the hours crawled by like miles of foot-travel,
boredom noticed, an it began a feast of my willpower. There was barely enough in
total to keep boredom at bay. I spent my hours studying my tree, but only after
just a couple days I knew every millimeter of the tree by memory, and no
enjoyably-disruptive squirrels appeared to call it home. When I began to finally
see around me, though, boredom became a vague memory. I could not even attempt
to relate to it now. In just being conscious, endless content manifests around
me. The hours tick at a countable rate, so I avoid counting them as to not feel
rushed. The world around me was clearly finite, but the sheer volume and density
of fact existing in parallel all in my one experience forced me to more
preemptively structure my exploration. If I just randomly swerved my attention
around, I would never get to it all. I would never satisfactorily cover ever
sandy indent in the lake's coast, the life of every hair on every animal in the
borough hosted among the roots of the forty-second tree off to the northwest. I
need to learn these things in their proper and complete order.

I seldom can notice the change from day to night anymore. The give-away used to
be the appearance and disappearance of shadows, but the shadows' paths have
become so familiar to me that no matter their position they look like the same
familiar shadows I expected them to be. My attention is busy unfolding the
experience of novel things, and has little time to benchmark my progress by
fully understood shadow-paths. The sun and moon's journeys through the sky have
come to appear as luminous streaks, where I can only discern the celestial
body's exact position if I take a momentary break from my usual investigations.

It is not that the breeze feels faster stronger now, or that the sun and moon
cross the sky more quickly now, or that the young plants at my feet sprout in a
more animal-like way now. Time passes at the same rate as it always has, as far
as I can tell subjectively. What is so phenomenally new about my current state
of experiencing the world is the throughput of my sensory intake. There is so
much detail at different levels of temporal analysis that I fail to notice the
effects only relevant second-to-second. The growth of bark on a young sapling is
a beautiful and mesmerizing thing to watch, but only if you are attentive to the
day-by-day.

But why be restricted to this? Why not week-by-week? Year-by-year? I consider
the sapling again, the particular one down in the grove next to the toads' home
and the collection of rocks I have not looked into yet. I want to see this
fledgling tree bloom as a kind of flower. The environment around the tree is
fuzzy, like grass in the distance, but also the rocks and animals and other
plants. But the sapling is so precise and full of intent. It dances back and
forth to the sun's rhythm. Mosses and mushrooms skitter across the sapling's
relatively thin skin. It looses a few nascent branches, but extrudes new ones in
quick order. It makes the decision to finally reach mature heights as fast
possible, finding new strength in the divergence, due to rock erosion, of a
nearby stream towards it's root system. The tree stretches its sprawling roots
into the warm, moist dirt, feeling for all the best spots. And as a giant waking
from slumber, it reaches its branches in all directions to soak up the umami
sunlight and sweet fresh air.
