---
layout: post
title: I Was Born 10 Years Too Late
categories: ai education
abstract: My middle and high school experiences were mainly boring, long, and inefficient. However, now everything has changed with the advent of personalized AI tutors.
author: Henry Blanchette
table_of_contents: false
---

Back when I started middle school, in 2008, I can recall only very primitive
versions, if any, of my present interests. Almost everything I cared about at
the time I now consider utterly worthless. But middle school was
transformational in some ways -- I recall that in the transition from middle to
high school, I had developed significant precursors to my present interests and
attitudes, especially programming and libertarianism. In high school, these
precursors developed into basic forms I can identify with. Finally, in undergrad, these basic forms refined into my present main interests.

But let's focus on the middle- and high-school era, where I first formed my
basic interests. Looking back in some ways I am suprised that I developed
interests the way I did at all. I attended school among a sea (save for a few
close friends) of peers that were not only peers without my particular
interests, but peers that were typically fascinated _only_ by entertainment (I
won't expand on the distinction between "interest" and "entertainment" here, but
for at least some clarification, I mean "interest" to refer more to the things
that could feasibly turn into long-term productive trajectories of work into the
future), and avoiding school-related incentives to learn of course. And, I mean,
its totally typical among all people to care primarily about social life,
family, entertainment, etc., but around high school time is pretty much the only
chance you get to have a significant influence on the trajectory of your life --
professional life especially -- over the long term. Its when you're just
starting to learn what kinds of things will become your long-term interests.

And us high school students prioritized in this way for good reason. The high
school environment was abysmal. In retrospect, there are 3 classes that I think
were better than taking pretty much any free online course: 

1. AP World History
2. AP Spanish
3. AP Physics

It's no coincidence that they are all AP classes -- a natural (but imperfect)
way to filter for students that at least somewhat care about the class. 

But, this article isn't actually about much of a waste of time high school was
-- teens day care has its societal benefits too. And my high school experience
wasn't unique in the least, to my generation and perhaps several generations
before it. I expect that mine was highly above-average, given my fortune to go
to what is considered a relatively good school in my area.

This article is actually about how this situation has changed forever, starting
just now.

When I was in high school, we all had the internet of course. And I used the
internet extensively. But, it still requires a lot of manual effort, and
practiced skill, to extract information that is "above your current knowledge
level". Most presentations of information online each rely on some prerequisite
knowledge. To get that knowledge, you have to look for presentations of it
online, and then you have the same obligation for it's prerequisites.

During high school, I learned basic programming in Java and Javascript. It took
a long time and was very difficult. There were lots of resources online, but the
main thing that made it a tractable endeavor at all was that programming
inherently comes with a kind of tutor -- the computer. You can "ask" the
computer "questions" by running your program and getting feedback from
executation. To this day I still find this one of the most compelling aspects of
the act of programming.

But suppose I wanted to learn some reasonably advanced mathematical or
scientific topic in high school e.g. algebraic geometry or nuclear physics. I'd
have to climb an immense tower of specialized knowledge as presented mostly only
by specialists, or those writing the material for students with years of
preparation, where at each level the presentation of knowledge online or in
other media becomes increasingly hard to penetrate (for many reasons). It's
unlikely that I would make much meaningful progress in just high school, even if
I was extremely driven. It's just very difficult to that scale of learning and
research on your own. I would need to have much greater learning abilities than
I actually do have (but some people do!).

But now, you can.

Virtually every American high school student now enters the 9th grade backed by
an always-available one-on-one ultra-personalized tutor with encyclopedic
knowledge, if they choose to use it as one. Currently this tutor typically takes
the form of ChatGPT, Bing, or Bard, but the market, as well as capabilities, are
rapidly evolving.

These tutors are now _essential_ for any adequate high school education. And I
think, for many students, these tutors are _sufficient_ for an adequate high
school education. And for many of those students, I am sure that these tutors
can provide, mostly independently from any dedicated human instruction, an
educational experience way beyond any feasible high school education.



